# EFFECTS OF CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORKS ON COMPUTATIONAL ONCOLOGY

## Introduction
   Cancer is the leading cause of death worldwide, according to the World Health Organization(W.H.O), cancer accounted for nearly 10 million deaths in the year 2020. Cancer is a disease in which some of the body cells grow uncontrollably and spread to other parts of the body which consists of trillions of cells, hence cancer can start almost anywhere in the human body and spread throughout the body.
   Computer Science has ameliorated many aspects of human life and health care is no exception, with medical records being converted into electronic medical records(EMRs) to aid in accessing and retrieving data, scheduling appointments and providing treatment plans for patients, also analyzing large datasets gotten from medical records to monitor global outbreaks as was used during the COVID-19 outbreak.

## Convolutional neural networks
   A convolutional neural network(CNN or ConvNet) is a deep learning algorithm and a type of artificial neural network(ANN) with added layers which include the convolutional layers, rectified linear activation(ReLU) layers, pooling layers, and the fully connected layer. The convolutional neural network is mostly used to analyze visual data, the image undergoes several mathematical computations in each layer until it reaches the output layer. In the convolutional layer, the image is broken into pixels and passed through image filters to produce a convolved feature, the convolved feature goes through the rectified linear function which changes the negative pixels to zero, and the resulted feature map is then passed through the pooling layer where a down-sampling operation that reduces the dimensionality of the feature map is performed. The pooled feature map is flattened and fed as input to the fully connected layer to classify the images and in the case of oncology, binary classification of two classes of cancer, 0 for benign and 1 for malignant.

## Convolutional neural networks in cancer detection
   Artificial intelligence(AI) has been indispensable in cancer research and has attained vast performance breakthroughs in comparison to the results produced by human experts. Artificial intelligence and machine learning provide a lot of algorithms that improve the prediction accuracy of the detection of cancer cells. The most pragmatic algorithm for cancer detection is deep learning’s convolutional neural network which produces an accuracy of up to 90% when detecting cancer from a radiographic image. It is no surprise that convolutional neural networks contribute heavily to cancer diagnosis in several areas such as the early detection of cancerous cells which increases the patient’s chance for successful treatment, artificial intelligence algorithm detection may reduce the cost of tests, and avoid wasteful therapy.

## Conclusion
   Although a cure for cancer has eluded mankind, the realization that gene damage and genetic mutations can cause cancer was arguably one of the greatest research advances in the modern era. The use of convolutional neural networks in cancer imagery classification has proven very useful in cancer treatment with further research ongoing to better the results achieved from convolutional neural networks and provide significant progress in the global fight against cancer.
                                                                                                           ## Okoli Chukwuemeka J.


